[Music]
hello I'm serel vaner this is counting
the cost on Alia Zer your weekly look at
the world of business and economics this
week an economy in ruins the United
Nations warns the war on Gaza could set
back development in the Palestinian
territories by more than a decade also
this week spending billions of dollars
to finance its War Israel's Central Bank
says the conflict is a major shock to
the country's economy Plus on the edge
of the Abyss the spillover of the war
into Lebanon could shatter what's left
of lebanon's fragile
[Music]
economy the Palestinian territories are
dependent on Israel for their labor and
Goods markets and for basic services
like water and electricity they are
locked in a cycle of underdevelopment
caused by Decades of Israeli
restrictions and occupation Palestinian
GDP stood at just over2 billion last
year by comparison Israel's economy is
worth nearly $500 billion the UN says
the war on Gaza could set back
development by as much as 16 years and
the longer the conflict goes on the
worse things will get in a recent report
the UN says GDP in the Palestinian
territories has fallen by more than 4%
this is after 1 month of War that's a
bigger impact than any previous Israel
Palestine war two full months of
conflict would cut GDP by an estimated
8.4% or $1.7 billion and three months of
War now you're looking at $2.5 billion
doar in GDP
loss the war is also devastating the
labor market 61% that's the majority of
all jobs in Gaza 61% of jobs in Gaza
have been raised and in the occupied
West Bank 24% of jobs are gone one
quarter the poverty figures are alarming
the number of Palestinians living in
poverty has risen by 20% and that could
soon be 34% if the war continues for
second month that means nearly half a
million more people living in
poverty now the war has had a
devastating impact on gaza's economy and
that's no surprise when you see
flattened buildings and an entire
population Under Fire we covered that in
previous shows but the UN has also drawn
attention to the massive economic
disruption in the occupied West Bank and
today we're focusing on that the
territory has effectively been sealed
off from Israel since October the 7th in
what has been described as another form
of collective punishment Palestinians
and their goods cannot get into Israel
Farmers have seen prices collapse as
their produce ends up D dumped in local
markets Bernard Smith reports from
beta the crops are ready for
harvesting but Palestinian Farmers have
lost access to their main customers in
Israel since October the 7th Israel's
military has effectively sealed off the
occupied West
Bank the Jordan volley is palestine's
food basket we produce most of the West
Bank's products peppers Kat Obin
everything comes from this region when
the crossings to Israel are closed all
of these goods go to the local markets
which causes the prices to drop on some
days we don't sell
anything just getting to Market is a
challenge Palestinians are forced to
take circuitous routes through the
occupied West Bank to avoid Israeli
settlements the quickest Road for us
today is 40 km it should take 30 minutes
but it's only open to Israelis
Palestinians have to take a major
detour it adds 110 km to our journey in
the past 5 weeks more checkpoints and
road closures have
appeared some checkpoints are only open
from 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. this causes
problems and it also causes harm to the
small villages we have to detour through
90 minutes later we get to the mark
Market it's almost
deserted before October the 7th this was
a packed wholesale Market with fruit
from Israel and vegetables from the West
Bank but now Israel has put in a
checkpoint just outside there and that's
choked off access to the market because
it's stopping Palestinians using a main
road that passes through a nearby
Village and the Israelis have done that
to protect the settlers who live all
around
here prices of vegetables have more than
haved shifts have been cut some
businesses have closed go
down we're constantly afraid so much so
that when we come to work for example
I'm from nabalis and I have to leave
home at 1: in the morning when the
checkpoint isn't busy because if I get
there later I could be stuck for more
than 2 hours which impacts my work here
as settlements expand and new ones
appear those weights at checkpoints get
longer and longer significantly
disrupting businesses as well as the
lives of the Palestinians forced to
enure them
Bernard Smith Al jazer beta in the
occupied West Bank from romala in the
Palestinian occupied territories I'm
joined Now by Raja khidi director
general of the Palestine Economic Policy
Research Institute thank you for being
with us we saw in that report by Bernard
Smith some of the ways in which an
occupying power in this case Israel can
squeeze the economy of an occupied
territory we saw you know there is no
freedom of movement or there's limited
freedom of movement limited access to
other markets in this case access of
Palestinian Goods to the Israeli Market
what are the other factors that our
viewers should keep in mind yeah thank
you the report actually focused on
something which is critical and which is
yet to be uh as as one of the many
shocks that we're we're experiencing
economically is yet to be felt fully uh
we've already uh in the West Bank that
is uh experienced the first very
important shock of the war which is the
return of around 200,000 up to 200,000
Palestinians who used to work in Israel
and who used to bring around $3 billion
into the Palestinian economy
approximately 15% of its natural income
uh so those uh people are not not only
no longer bringing in that that income
for two months probably three possibly
for the rest of the year of next year
but uh they are now an additional uh 15
177% of Labor Force which is sitting in
the West Bank unemployed so that's an
example of the of the first shock we've
had others uh Palestinian Arabs in
Israel who used to bring in around 1.51
billion dollars a year to the economy
and purchases and services they sto
coming these are some of the immediate
shocks uh the clearance Revenue cut off
by uh uh Israel which anyhow is going to
go down because of the repressed demand
so hence less Imports hence less trade
uh tax uh uh but the actual total with
can we can we focus can we focus on that
for a moment Israel withholding
Palestinian tax that it should normally
and would normally transfer to the
Palestinian Authority and now that
transfer of money Palestinian money to
the Palestinian Authority has been
disrupted what is the impact of
that well you see I I find your your
report was very useful and that it
talked about something very specific
that's at an extreme uh the local market
problem is in an extreme situation today
but this is something that is is
structural in our economy and is worse
and better from day to day from year to
year similarly the clearance tax issue
so Israel has been withholding deducting
unilaterally uh around 15% of what is
due to the PA for the last three years
um and and uh and transferring what
Remains What it decides it it is willing
to part with of Palestinian refugees now
in October it went further so previous
deductions included
uh its calculation of Palestinian
prisoners and martyrs payments that made
were made by the PA in the most in
October uh episode as you recall at the
end of the month the Minister of Finance
the extremist uh uh Minister of Finance
smich didn't want of course him and his
allies didn't want to transfer anything
uh because basically you know as they
are punishing the whole Palestinian
people in Gaza they are punishing the
rest of the Palestinian people and this
is the best way to punish the PA so
there was a huge argument obviously
amazing American pressure uh whatever
and so they said I mean it's typical of
Israel said okay we'll we'll transfer
everything but the par portion that the
PA used to pay to Gaza former PA
employees in Gaza and pensions in Gaza I
around 100 million so what was us uh
monthly a $300 million let's say
clearance tax transfer to the PA was
anyhow down to around 250 million
because of repressed demand and was
going to be another 100 million was
going to be taken off so the PA said
we're not going to take it you know
which was a correct position I believe
in the circumstances one more thing
before I let you go the impact over time
of this war how do you assess that even
if this war were to end now look uh the
numbers quoted by the undp the UN es
report are good first you know back of
envelope calculations we're all doing
our calculations different institutions
are looking at different issues we've
looked at things we have a paper which
will come come out very soon on the
impact of the labor force uh cut off and
so I mean there are so many uh uh
different waves coming at us to begin
with and I think this is something we
didn't have a chance to talk about but
you know Gaza is is we can no longer
talk about the West Bank and Palestinian
the Palestinian economy is one we have
to not talk about West Bank uh uh e
economy uh East Jerusalem economy which
is another story and of course Gaza now
Gaza is zero g Gaza has been
decommissioned the idea that there are
even 20% its labor force working at the
currently is is is almost you know
fantastic and they also the idea that
somehow this economy is just going to
pick itself up if if tomorrow the the
fighting were to end but we're already
talking about put aside the tens of
billions that will be required for
Relief and reconstruction we're already
talking about an annual blow to GDP and
to gross national income of up to 20 to
30% I think this year in the coming year
so that 4% a month is perhaps accurate
but this this is a cumulative and
accumulative and a a wave after wave
effect that we'll be seeing all year all
next year regardless Raja khi thank you
so much for all that context you're
director general of the Palestine
Economic Policy Research Institute
thanks for your time today thank you
very
much consider the economy of Israel now
from restaurants to high-tech companies
and a major gas field thousands of
Israeli businesses ground to a halt
after the country launched its war on
Gaza the government is now spending more
on everything from weapons to wages for
the hundreds of thousands of reservists
that it called up for military duty the
finance ministry estimates the war is
costing the economy around $260 million
every day now that's more than a quarter
of a billion dollars every day meanwhile
Israel's revenue from tourism and
household spending has dropped so public
finances of course are strained a couple
more more numbers for you to bear in
mind Israel says that it raised more
than $8 billion in debt since the war
started the budget deficit is increasing
it's expected to reach 4% of economic
output this year 5% in 2024 and the cost
to ensure its Sovereign bonds against
the default is more than double what it
was before the War Began the calculist
business newspaper estimates the war
could cost as much as $ 51 billion
that's nearly 10% of Israel's GDP and
that is if the conflict goes on for up
to a year the Bank of Israel is calling
on the government to balance two things
support the economy on the one hand but
also maintain a sound fiscal position
prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu has
vowed to quote open the Taps and to roll
out the stimulus package bigger than
during the covid-19 pandemic that
includes cash handouts to Army
reservists and businesses affected by
the war but critics uh say the measures
did not go far enough and the
eligibility criteria specifically to get
that government money were too
strict well to discuss all of this I'm
joined Now by Professor Michael benad
Michael is Professor of Economics at
City University of London Michael this
war we just said that number is costing
Israel a quarter of a billion dollars a
day slightly in excess of that why does
this war come with a higher price tag
for Israel than previous Wars it has
waged we're thinking for instance of the
2006 Lebanon
war oh hello so uh first of all the
number uh from calcalist I think is
probably the worst case scenario yes uh
the direct costs are likely to be about
20 billion over the course of this year
and next of which about uh 8 billion is
direct defense expenditure which is more
than covered by the usaid package uh
that we've received of 14 billion uh uh
much of the rest will be used to support
the 200,000 uh civilians currently
displaced uh once the uh government gets
its act together and um and then
rebuilding the 22 towns and Villages
destroyed in the initial attack of
course none of that can actually happen
so that's probably sometime late next
year uh because nobody is going to agree
to live alongside uh G the Gaza Strip as
long as it's controlled by Hamas so uh
the indirect effect is Pro in terms of a
loss of uh of output is probably means
uh a reduction in growth from about 3%
to 1.5% that means a loss of about 7 uh
7 billion dollar um again how much next
year depends on how long the war will
last I think uh a full year is probably
uh on the extreme end uh keep in mind
Israel has about $200 billion do in
reserves so it's certainly possible to
pay for everything um Israel is a rich
country uh what we need mostly from the
United States so it's very nice that the
United States is so supportive but what
we really need is the ability to uh buy
the weapons uh because it's it's really
not possible for us to produce uh given
the economies of scale everything that
we we require um of course it would be a
lot better if we didn't have to spend
the money on on these kinds of things if
there were M since since you bring up
since you bring up the role of the US
it's a question I wanted to ask you
later but I ask you now what happens if
the US were to downside downscale its
financial support to Israel could Israel
continue to prosecute the war the way
it's been
doing oh absolutely as I said we have
about $200 billion dollar in reserves I
mean my students back in Israel would
always ask me why it is that a country
with a floating exchange rate has such
an enormous War chest well the answer is
war yeah uh you know we need this kind
of uh uh a back stop precisely for these
kinds of emergencies so the the money
that the United States is giving us is
is you know we're enormously grateful
for it but it's not necessary for uh us
to defend ourselves what we do need is
access to the weapons we can afford to
buy it at market prices we wouldn't be
able to produce them ourselves that's
that's the difference the Prime Minister
has approved plans to amend the state
budget in order to increase the deficit
and cut spending on Coalition agreements
now this is important there's been a
political row over these Coalition funds
as they're known uh money earmarked for
Benjamin netanyahu's backers like
payouts for Ultra Orthodox schools and
for the various parties comprising the
government in a letter sent to Netanyahu
a group of 300 leading Israeli
economists of which Michael is one said
quote the grave blow that Israel was
dealt requires a fundamental change in
National priorities and a massive
diversion of funds to deal with war
damage Aid to victims and the
rehabilitation of the economy now they
went on a basic and necessary step would
be to Halt financing of anything
unessential to war first and foremost
the Coalition funds why are these
Coalition funds Michael so
contentious there are a lot of the
government institutions because of the
uh a lot of political calculus about
maintaining the Coalition um you know
these are largely extraneous they were
extraneous before the before the war
they're even more extraneous now um so
it's not it's not it's not even the
amounts that we're talking about because
again you know 3.5 billion it's less
than 1% of GDP but it also just looks
bad at a time that people are being
asked to make sacrifices the politicians
don't seem to be able to uh to come to
some sort of a consensus about getting
rid of a lot of these things you know
there was a a big effort uh by the
government to do what we would call a
Judicial overhaul a change in the way
the uh the government operates to
centralize more power in its hands and
what this P what this what what the
attack has sort of demonstrated is that
actually it's the civil society that
they were trying to weaken that is
actually Israel's great strength I mean
we have a civil society Second To None
uh unfortunately attached to a
government that is uh kind of
incompetent at the moment but you know
there's an optimistic scenario to all of
that and that is that it's easy to
replace a failed government it's much
more difficult to change the
population Michael benad professor of
econom economics at City University of
London thank you so much Michael now the
sporadic exchanges of fire along the
Lebanon Israel border continue for a
second month Hezbollah is attacking
Israeli military positions saying that
it wants to relieve pressure on its Ally
Hamas in Gaza many Lebanese fear that
their country could be drawn into the
war and they worry about further damage
to an economy that is already on its
knes Sena hod reports from
Beirut towns along lebanon's border with
with Israel are empty homes abandoned
and damaged schools closed livelihoods
Frozen sporadic and at times intense
crossb exchanges of fire is in its
second month Hezbollah says it is
relieving pressure on its Ally Hamas
which is fighting Israeli soldiers in
Gaza a few dozen kilometers deeper into
Lebanon there is no
war but it's uncertain times for a
population struggling with an economic
crisis the hospitality sector has been
hit hard the Restaurant Association
reports an 80% drop in
business people are scared and anxious
about the situation there are days when
the streets are
empty several Western and Arab
governments have called on their
citizens to leave or not to visit
Lebanon many airlines have scaled back
or cancelled flights to and from Beirut
whatever is going to happen here in
Lebanon a war potential war between us
and Israel so uh it will it will bring
this economy into a
depression uh we were already into
something called the stack plation but
right now it's uh it's becoming a
depression in the economy we have people
leaving we have no tourist no tourists
coming many Lebanese were already
struggling to put food on the table
lebanon's economy collapsed years ago
instead of carrying out much needed
reforms politicians used the dwindling
foreign currency Reserves at the central
bank now the state is nearly bankrupt
and its institutions are
dysfunctional tourism and remittances
from Lebanese abroad have been the
backbone of the economy and while people
here sympathize with the Palestinians
and their struggle many fear a repeat of
the 2006 war between Hezbollah and
Israel
a lot of people are worried we're hoping
nothing will happen but people are
afraid that the Israelis will hit Beirut
as well what is happening in the south
is very bad tens of thousands of
Lebanese have already left their homes a
full-blown war or even a protracted War
of Attrition confined to the Border
region would be costly for a country
already in Ruins zanah aljazera
Beirut joining us from Beirut to discuss
this is Sami atala the director of the
independent Think Tank the policy
initiative Sammy thank you for being
with us so it's been five weeks more
than five weeks now of um permanent
tension between Israel and Lebanon and
crossb firing of various kinds what's
been the impact so far of of this what
to call it of this Quasi War uh between
Lebanon and Israel on lebanon's
economy hi s thank you so much for
having me indeed um the last few weeks
were extremely tense and remain so and
uh as you know there's been a loss of
several innocent uh lives um at the
border or close to the Border including
you know civilians obviously and
journalists um the use of phosphorus
bombs by Israel has destroyed um a lot
of you know pine trees and olive trees
um and Wildlife um and as you know this
is very toxic and uh as as a material
and which spreads fire and has major
long-term effect which we're yet to in
fact assess uh more than 10,000 people
probably have left the South or their
Villages out of fear that this will
spread and as a result of the um
shelling uh by Israel on the border um
as you already know it has been said in
the report in fact the tourism has
actually declined the number of flights
coming to Lebanon has also uh been
reduced uh people are very how important
is that by the way the the the uh the
drop the impact on the tourism sector in
Lebanon it's very in fact important
because the tourism sector is a key
sector in the economy um Lebanese rely
on tourist and the hard currency that
come with the tourist uh so in fact for
consumption uh particularly and the
touristic establishments restaurant you
know and and other touristic sites so
the government says it has an emergency
plan how strong is the plan of the
Lebanese government because unlike
Israel that we just talked about it's
not like this country has a lot of cash
reserves that it can draw upon
briefly absolutely I mean uh Lebanon did
or the Lebanese government did produce a
plan um frankly um the plan is just you
know Inc on paper um the Lebanese state
is bankrupt as a result of the financial
crisis that has been uh in place for or
for the last four years um the public
bureaucracy is much weaker now people
are not going to to to their jobs
because of the low wages as a result of
the devaluation uh we have yet to see
the state being really serious about
actually conducting or even implementing
a plan in a case of a war now as you
mentioned the reserves of Lebanon have
dwindled to 8 billion but I must say
that the professor from uh Israel
talking about the 200 billion dollar
Reserve in Israel I mean it's important
to sort of contextualize this because in
fact nowhere where I heard that actually
Israel is an occupying Palestine and
hence the reserve is not to defend
itself it's actually to maintain the
occupation right so uh but that's about
Israel but then in Lebanon lustration is
much more dire as a result of these very
bad policies that have actually been uh
uh remain in place in the last uh few
years so we hope hope that this actually
doesn't escalate because the
repercussions are going to be enormous
on the
country samala director of The
Independent Think Tank the policy
initiative thank you very much Sammy for
your time
today and that's our show for this week
get in touch with us on X van seral is
my handle do use the hasht ajcc when you
do or drop us an email on counting the
cost
al.net and there's more as always online
that is
al.com CC you'll find our reports links
entire episodes for you to catch up on
that's it for this edition of counting
the costs I'm sir vaner from the whole
team here in Doha thank you for joining
us the news on aljazera is
[Music]
next